In a certain Eussian ministerial department
But it is perhaps better that I do not mention
which department it was. There are in the
whole of Eussia no persons more sensitive than
Government officials. Each of them believes if he is annoyed in any way, that the whole official class is 
insulted in his person.
Eecently an Isprawnik (country magistrate)—I do not know of which town—is said to have
drawn up a report with the object of showing
that, ignoring Government orders, people were
speaking of Isprawniks in terms of contempt. In
order to prove his assertions, he forwarded with
his report a bulky work of fiction, in which on
about every tenth page an Isprawnik appeared
generally in a drunken condition.
In order therefore to avoid any unpleasantness, I will not definitely indicate the department in which the scene 
of my story is laid, and
will rather say "
in a certain chancellery."
Well, in a certain chancellery there was a
certain man who, as I cannot deny, was not of an attractive appearance. He was short, had a face marke'd with 
smallpox, was rather bald infront, and his forehead and cheeks were deeplylined with furrows—to say nothing of 
otherphysical imperfections. Such was the outeraspect of our hero, as produced by the St Petersburg climate.
As regards his official rank—for with usEussians the official rank must always be given—he was what is usually 
known as a permanenttitular councillor, one of those unfortunate beingswho, as is well known, are made a butt of 
byvarious authors who have the Had habit ofattacking people who cannot defend themselves.Our hero's family name 
was Bashmatchkin; his baptismal name Akaki Akakievitch. Perhaps the reader may think this name somewhatstrange 
and far-fetched, but he can be assuredthat it is not so, and that circumstances soarranged it that it was quite 
impossible to givehim any other name.
This happened in the following way. AkakiAkakievitch was born, if I am not mistaken, onthe night of the 23rd of 
March. His deceasedmother, the wife of an official and a very goodwoman, immediately made proper arrangements 
for his baptism. When the time came,she was lying on the bed before the door. Ather right hand stood the 
godfather, Ivan Ivanovitch Jeroshkin, a very important person, whowas registrar of the senate ; at her left, 
the god-mother Anna Semenovna Byelobrushkova, the
wife of a police inspector, a woman of rare
virtues.
Three names were suggested to the mother
from which to choose one for the child—Mokuja, Sossuja, or Khozdazat. " No," she said, "
I don't like such names."
In order to meet her wishes, the church calendar was opened in another place, and the names
Triphiliy, Dula, and Varakhasiy were found.
' ' This is a punishment from heaven,
' said the
mother. "What sort of names are these! I never heard the like ! If it had been Varadat
or Varukh, but Triphiliy and Varakhasiy ! ' ' They looked again in the calendar and found
Pavsikakhiy and Vakhtisiy.
"Now I see," said the mother, "this is plainly fate. If there is no help for it, then he
had better take his father's name, which was
Akaki."
So the child was called Akaki Akakievitch.
It was baptised, although it wept and cried and
made all kinds of grimaces, as though it had a presentiment that it would one day be a titular
councillor.
We have related all this so conscientiously that
the reader himself might be convinced that it was impossible for the little Akaki to receive any
other name. When and how he entered the
chancellery and who appointed him, no one
could remember. However many of his superiorsmight come and go, he was always seen in thesame spot, in the same attitude, busy with thesame work, and bearing the same title; so thatpeople began to believe he had come into theworld just as he was, with his bald forehead andofficial uniform.
In the chancellery where he worked, no kindof notice was taken of him. Even the officeattendants did not rise from their seats whenheentered, nor look at him; they took no morenotice than if a fly had flown through the room.His superiors treated him in a coldly despoticmanner. The assistant of the head of thedepartment, when he pushed a pile of papersunder his nose, did not even say "
Please copythose," or "
There is something interesting foryou," or make any other polite remark such aswell-educated officials are in the habit of doing.But Akaki took the documents, without worryinghimself whether they had the right to hand themover to him or not, and straightway set to workto copy them.
His young colleagues made him the butt oftheir ridicule and their elegant wit, so far asofficials can be said to possess any wit. Theydid not scruple to relate in his presence varioustales of their own invention regarding his mannerof life and his landlady, who was seventy yearsold. They declared that she beat him, and
inquired of him when he would lead her to the
marriage altar. Sometimes they let a shower
of scraps of paper fall on his head, and told himthey were snowflakes.
But Akaki Akakievitch made no answer to
all these attacks; he seemed oblivious of their
presence. His work was not affected in the
slightest degree; during all these interruptions
he did not make a single error in copying. Only
when the horse-play grew intolerable, when he was held by the arm and prevented writing, he
would say
' ' Do leave me alone ! Why do youalways want to disturb me at work ?
' ' There was something peculiarly pathetic in these words
and the way in which he uttered them.
One day it happened that when a young clerk,
who had been recently appointed to the chancellery, prompted by the example of the others, was playing him some trick, he suddenly seemedarrested by something in the tone of Akaki' s voice, and from that moment regarded the old
official with quite different eyes. He felt as though
some supernatural power drew him away fromthe colleagues whose acquaintance he had madehere, and whom he had hitherto regarded as well-educated, respectable men, and alienated
him from them. Long afterwards, when sur- rounded by gay companions, he would see the
figure of the poor little councillor and hear the
words ' ' Do leave me alone ! Why will you always disturb me at work ?
' ' Along with these.words, he also heard others :
' ' Am I not yourbrother? " On such occasions the young manwould hide his face in his hands, and think howlittle humane feeling after all was to be foundinmen's hearts; how much coarseness and crueltywas to be found even in the educated and thosewho were everywhere regarded as good andhonourable men. Never was there an official who did hiswork so zealously as Akaki Akakievitch. "
Zealously," do I say? He worked with a passionatelove of his task. While he copied official documents, a world of varied beauty rose beforehis eyes. His delight in copying was legible inhis face. To form certain letters afforded himspecial satisfaction, and when he came to themhe was quite another man; he began to smile,his eyes sparkled, and he pursed up his lips, sothat those who knew him could see by his facewhich letters he was working at. Had he been rewarded according to his zeal,he would perhaps—to his own astonishment—have been raised to the rank of civic councillor.However, he was not destined, as his colleaguesexpressed it, to wear a cross at his buttonhole,but only to get haemorrhoids by leading a toosedentary life. For the rest, I must mention that on oneoccasion he attracted a certain amount of
attention. A director, who was a kindly man and
wished to reward him for his long service,
ordered that he should be entrusted with a task
more important than the documents which he
usually had to copy. This consisted in preparing a report for a court, altering the headings of
various documents, and here and there changing
the first personal pronoun into the third.
Akaki undertook the work; but it confused
and exhausted him to such a degree that the
sweat ran from his forehead and he at last exclaimed : " No ! Please give me again something to copy." From that time he was allowed
to continue copying to his life's end.
Outside this copying nothing appeared to exist
for him. He did not even think of his clothes.
His uniform, which was originally green, had
acquired a reddish tint. The collar was so narrow and so tight that his neck, although of
average length, stretched far out of it, and
appeared extraordinarily long, just like those of
the cats with movable heads, which are carried
about on trays and sold to the peasants in Eussian
villages.
Something was always sticking to his clothes—a piece of thread, a fragment of straw which had
been flying about, etc. Moreover he seemed
to have a special predilection for passing under
windows just when something not very clean was
being thrown out of them, and therefore he
constantly carried about on his hat pieces oforange-peel and such refuse. He never tookany notice of what was going on in the streets,in contrast to his colleagues who were alwayswatching people closely and whom nothing delighted more than to see someone walking alongon the opposite pavement with a rent in histrousers.
But Akaki Akakievitch saw nothing but theclean, regular lines of his copies before him;and only when he collided suddenly withahorse's nose, which blew its breath noisily in hisface, did the good man observe that he was notsitting at his writing-table among his neat duplicates, but walking in the middle of the street. When he arrived home, he sat down at onceto supper, ate his cabbage-soup hurriedly, andthen, without taking any notice how it tasted, aslice of beef with garlic, together with the fliesand any other trifles which happened to belying on it. As soon as his hunger was satisfied, he set himself to write, and began to copythe documents which he had brought home withhim. If he happened to have no official documents to copy, he copied for his own satisfactionpolitical letters, not for their more or less grandstyle but because they were directed to somehigh personage.
When the grey St Petersburg sky is darkenedby the veil of night, and the whole of officialdom
has finished its dinner according to its gastronomical inclinations or the depth of its purse—when all recover themselves from the perpetual
scratching of bureaucratic pens, and all the cares and business with which men so often needlessly
burden themselves, they devote the evening to recreation. One goes to the theatre; another roams about the streets, inspecting toilettes;
another whispers flattering words to some young
girl who has risen like a star in his modest official circle. Here and there one visits a colleague in
his third or fourth story flat, consisting of two rooms with an entrance-hall and kitchen, fitted with some pretentious articles of furniture purchased by many abstinences.
In short, at this time every official betakes himself to some form of recreation—playing whist,
drinking tea, and eating cheap pastry or smoking tobacco in long pipes. Some relate scandals
about great people, for in whatever situation of
life the Eussian may be, he always likes to hear
about the aristocracy; others recount well-worn
but popular anecdotes, as for example that of the
commandant to whom it was reported that a rogue had cut off the horse's tail on the monument of Peter the Great.
But even at this time of rest and recreation,
Akaki Akakievitch remained faithful to his habits.
No one could say that he had ever seen him in
any evening social circle. After he had written
as much as he wanted, he went to bed, andthought of the joys of the coming day, and thefine copies which God would give him to do.
So flowed on the peaceful existence of a manwho was quite content with his post and his in-come of four hundred roubles a year. He mightperhaps have reached an extreme old age if oneof those unfortunate events had not befallen him,which not only happen to titular but to actualprivy, court, and other councillors, and also topersons who never give advice nor receive it. In St Petersburg all those who draw a salaryof four hundred roubles or thereabouts haveaterrible enemy in our northern cold, althoughsome assert that it is very good for the health.About nine o'clock in the morning, whentheclerks of the various departments betake themselves to their offices, the cold nips their nosesso vigorously that most of them are quite bewildered. If at this time even high officials sosuffer from the severity of the cold in their ownpersons that the tears come into their eyes, whatmust be the sufferings of the titular councillors,whose means do not allow of their protectingthemselves against the rigour of winter? Whenthey have put on their light cloaks, they musthurry through five or six streets as rapidlyaspossible, and then in the porter's lodge warmthemselves and wait till their frozen officialfaculties have thawed.
For some time Akaki had been feeling on his
back and shoulders very sharp twinges of pain,
although he ran as fast as possible from his
dwelling to the office. After well considering the
matter, he came to the conclusion that these were due to the imperfections of his cloak'. In his
room he examined it carefully, and discovered
that in two or three places it had become so thin
as to be quite transparent, and that the lining was much torn. This cloak had been for a long time the standing object of jests on the part of Akaki' s merciless colleagues. They had even robbed it of the
noble name of "cloak," and called it a cowl.
It certainly presented a remarkable appearance.
Every year the collar had grown smaller, for
every year the poor titular councillor had taken
a piece of it away in order to repair some other
part of the cloak ; and these repairs did not look
as if they had been done by the skilled hand
of a tailor. They had been executed in a very
clumsy way and looked remarkably ugly.
After Akaki Akakievitch had ended his
melancholy examination, he said to himself that
he must certainly take his cloak to Petrovitch the
tailor, who lived high up in a dark den on the
fourth floor. With his squinting eyes and pock-marked face,
Petrovitch certainly did not look as if he had the
honour to make frock-coats and trousers for
high officials—that is to say, when he was sober,and not absorbed in more pleasant diversions.I might dispense here with dwelling on thistailor; but since it is the custom to portray thephysiognomy of every separate personage inatale, I must give a better or worse descriptionof Petrovitch. Formerly when he was a simpleserf in his master's house, he was merely calledGregor. When he became free, he thoughtheought to adorn himself with a new name, anddubbed himself Petrovitch; at the same timehebegan to drink lustily, not only on the high festi-vals but on all those which are marked withacross in the calendar. By thus solemnly celebrating the days consecrated by the Church,heconsidered that he was remaining faithful to thetraditions of his childhood; and when he quarrelled with his wife, he shouted that she wasanearthly minded creature and a German. Of thislady we have nothing more to relate than that shewas the wife of Petrovitch, and that she did notwear a kerchief but a cap on her head. Fortherest, she was not pretty ; only the soldiers lookedat her as they passed, then they twirled theirmoustaches and walked on, laughing.
Akaki Akakievitch accordingly betook himselfto the tailor's attic. He reached it by a dark,dirty, damp staircase, from which, as in all theinhabited houses of the poorer class in St Petersburg, exhaled an effluvia of spirits vexatious to
nose and eyes alike. As the titular councillor
climbed these slippery stairs, he calculated what
sum Petrovitch could reasonably ask for repairing his cloak, and determined only to give him
a rouble.
The door of the tailor's flat stood open in order
to provide an outlet for the clouds of smoke which
rolled from the kitchen, where Petrovitch' s wife was just then cooking fish. Akaki, his eyes
smarting, passed through the kitchen without her
seeing him, and entered the room where the
tailor sat on a large, roughly made, wooden table,
his legs crossed like those of a Turkish pasha,
and, as is the custom of tailors, with bare feet. What first arrested attention, when one approached him, was his thumb nail, which was a
little misshapen but as hard and strong as the
shell of a tortoise. Round his neck were hung
several skeins of thread, and on his knees lay a
tattered coat. For some minutes he had been
trying in vain to thread his needle. He was first of all angry with the gathering darkness, then
with the thread.
"Why the deuce won't you go in, you
worthless scoundrel! "
he exclaimed.
Akaki saw at once that he had come at an
inopportune moment. He wished he had found
Petrovitch at a more favourable time, when he was enjoying himself—when, as his wife ex- pressed it, he was having a substantial ration of
Brandy. 'At sucK times the tailor was extraordinarily ready to meet his customer's proposalswith bows and gratitude to boot. Sometimesindeed his wife interfered in the transaction, anddeclared that he was drunk and promised to dothe work at much too low a price; but if thecustomer paid a trifle more, the matter wassettled. Unfortunately for the titular councillor,Petrovitch Ka'd just now not yet touched thebrandy flask. At such moments he was hard,obstinate, and ready to demand an exorbitantprice.
Akaki foresaw this danger, and would gladlyhave turned back again, but it was already toolate. The tailor's single eye—for he was one-eyed—had already noticed him, and AkakiAkakievitcK murmured involuntarily "Goodday, Petrovitch."
"Welcome, sir," answered the tailor, andfastened his glance on the titular councillor'shand to see what he had in it. " I come just—merely—in order—I want—"We must Here remark that the modest titularcouncillor was in the habit of expressing histhoughts only by prepositions, adverbs, or particles, which never yielded a distinct meaning.If the matter of which he spoke was a difficultone, Ke could never finish the sentence he hadbegun. So that when transacting business, he
generally entangled himself in the formula ' * Yes —it is indeed true that " Then he would
remain standing and forget what he wished to say, or believe that he had said it. " What do you want, sir? "
asked Petrovitch,
scrutinising him from top to toe with a searching
look, and contemplating his collar, sleeves, coat,
buttons—in short his whole uniform, although
he knew them all very well, having made them
himself. That is the way of tailors whenever
they meet an acquaintance.
Then Akaki answered, stammering as usual,
' * I want—Petrovitch—this cloak—you see—it is
still quite good, only a little dusty—and therefore
it looks a little old. It is, however, still quite
new, only that it is worn a little—there in the
back and here in the shoulder—and there are
three quite little splits. You see it is hardly
worth talking about; it can be thoroughly re- paired in a few minutes.' ' Petrovitch took the unfortunate cloak, spread
it on the table, contemplated it in silence, and
shook his head. Then he stretched his hand
towards the window-sill for his snuff-box, a round
one with the portrait of a general on the lid. 1 do not know whose portrait it was, for it had been
accidentally injured, and the ingenious tailor had
gummed a piece of paper over it. After Petrovitch had taken a pinch of snuff, he
examined the cloak again, held it to the light, and
once more shook his head. Then he examinedthe lining, took a second pinch of snuff, andatlast exclaimed, " No ! that is a wretched rag! It is beyond repair! "
At these words Akaki's courage fell. What ! ' ' he cried in the querulous tone ofachild. ''Can this hole really not be repaired?Look ! Petrovitch ; there are only two rents, andyou have enough pieces of cloth to mend themwith."
' ' Yes, I have enough pieces of cloth ; but howshould I sew them on? The stuff is quite wornout; it won't bear another stitch." "
Well, can't you strengthen it with anotherpiece of cloth ?
' ' "
No, it won't bear anything more; cloth afterall is only cloth, and in its present conditionagust of wind might blow the wretched mantleintotatters."
"But if you could only make it last a littlelonger, do you see—really "
; "No!" answered Petrovitch decidedly."
There is nothing more to be done with it; it iscompletely worn out. It would be better if youmade yourself foot bandages out of it for thewinter; they are warmer than stockings. It wasthe Germans who invented stockings for theirown profit." Petrovitch never lost an opportunity of having a hit at the Germans. "Youmust certainly buy a new cloak," he added.
"A new cloak ?" exclaimed Akaki Akakievitch, and it grew dark before his eyes. The
tailor's work-room seemed to go round with him,
and the only object he could clearly distinguish was the paper-patched general's portrait on the
tailor's snuff-box. "A new cloak!" he murmured, as though half asleep.
M But I have no money." "
Yes, a new cloak," repeated Petrovitch with
cruel calmness. "
Well, even if I did decide on it—how
much "
" You mean how much would it cost? " "Yes."
"About a hundred and fifty roubles,"
answered the tailor, pursing his lips. This
diabolical tailor took a special pleasure in
embarrassing his customers and watching the
expression of their faces with his squinting
single eye.
1 ' A hundred and fifty roubles for a cloak ! ' exclaimed Akaki Akakievitch in a tone which
sounded like an outcry—possibly the first he had
uttered since his birth.
"Yes," replied Petrovitch. "And then the
marten-fur collar and silk lining for the hood
would make it up to two hundred roubles."
"Petrovitch, L adjure you!" said Akaki
Akakievitch in an imploring tone, no longer
hearing nor wishing to hear the tailor's words
"try to make this cloak last me a littlelonger."
"No, it would be a useless waste of time andwork."
After this answer, Akaki departed, feelingquite crushed; while Petrovitch, with his lipsfirmly pursed up, feeling pleased with himself forhis firmness and brave defence of the art oftailoring, remained sitting on the table.
Meanwhile Akaki wandered about the streetslike a somnambulist, at random and withoutanobject. "What a terrible business!" he said to himself. "Eeally, I could never have believed that it would come to that. No,"hecontinued after a short pause, "I could nothave guessed that it would come to that. NowI find myself in a completely unexpected situation—in a difficulty that " As he thus continued his monologue, insteadof approaching his dwelling, he went, withoutnoticing it, in quite a wrong direction. Achimney-sweep brushed against him and blackened his back as he passed by. From a housewhere building was going on, a bucket of plasterof Paris was emptied on his head. But he sawand heard nothing. Only when he collided witha sentry, who, after he had planted his halberdbeside him, was shaking out some snuff fromhissnuff-box with a bony hand, was he startled outof his reverie.
"What do you want?" the rough guardian
of civic order exclaimed. "
Can't you walk on
the pavement properly ?
' This sudden address at last completely roused
Akaki from his torpid condition. He collected
his thoughts, considered his situation clearly, and
began to take counsel with himself seriously and
frankly, as with a friend to whom one entrusts
the most intimate secrets. " No ! "
he said at last. "
To-day I will get
nothing from Petrovitch—to-day he is in a bad
humour—perhaps his wife has beaten him—I will look him up again next Sunday. On Saturday evenings he gets intoxicated; then the next
day he wants a pick-me-up—his wife gives him
no money—I squeeze a ten-kopeck piece into
his hand; then he will be more reasonable and
we can discuss the cloak further.'
' Encouraged by these reflections, Akaki waited
patiently till Sunday. On that day, having seen
Petrovitch' s wife leave the house, he betook
himself to the tailor's and found him, as he had
expected, in a very depressed state as the result
of his Saturday's dissipation. But hardly had
Akaki let a word fall about the mantle than the
diabolical tailor awoke from his torpor and
exclaimed, "
No, nothing can be done; you must
certainly buy a new cloak."
The titular councillor pressed a ten-kopeck
piece into his hand.
M
Thanks, my dear friend/
1 6aid Petrovitch;' that will get me a pick-me-up, and I willdrink your health with it. But as for youroldmantle, what is the use of talking about it? Itisn't worth a farthing. Let me only gettowork; I will make you a splendid one,Ipromise ! ' ' But poor Akaki Akakievitch still importunedthe tailor to repair his old one. "No, and again no," answered Petrovitch.11 It is quite impossible. Trust me; I won't takeyou in. I will even put silver hooks and eye£on the collar, as is now the fashion."
This time Akaki saw that he must follow thetailor's advice, and again all his courage sank.He must have a new mantle made. But howshould he pay for it? He certainly expectedaChristmas bonus at the office ; but that moneyhadbeen allotted beforehand. He must buy a pairof trousers, and pay his shoemaker for repairingtwo pairs of boots, and buy some fresh linen.Even if, by an unexpected stroke of good luck,the director raised the usual bonus from fortytofifty roubles, what was such a small amountincomparison with the immense sum which Petrovitch demanded? A mere drop of water in thesea.At any rate, he might expect that Petrovitch,if he were in a good humour, would lower theprice of the cloak to eighty roubles; but where
were these eighty roubles to be found? Perhaps
he might succeed if he left no stone unturned,
in raising half the sum ; but he saw no means of
procuring the other half. As regards the first half, he had been in the habit, as often as he
received a rouble, of placing a kopeck in a money-box. At the end of each half-year he
changed these copper coins for silver. He had
been doing this for some time, and his savings
just now amounted to forty roubles. Thus he
already had half the required sum. But the
other half ! Akaki made long calculations, and at last determined that he must, at least for a whole
year, reduce some of his daily expenses. Hewould have to give up his tea in the evening, and
copy his documents in his landlady's room, in
order to economise the fuel in his own. He also
resolved to avoid rough pavements as much as
possible, in order to spare his shoes; and finally to give out less washing to the laundress.
At first he found these deprivations rather
trying ; but gradually he got accustomed to them,
and at last took to going to bed without any
supper at all. Although his body suffered from
this abstinence, his spirit derived all the richer
nutriment from perpetually thinking about his
new cloak. From that time it seemed as though
his nature had completed itself ; as though he had
married and possessed a companion on his life
journey. This companion was the thought of hisnew cloak, properly wadded and lined.
From that time he became more lively, andhis character grew stronger, like that of a manwho has set a goal before himself which he willreach at all costs. All that was indecisive andvague in his gait and gestures had disappeared.A new fire began to gleam in his eyes, andinhis bold dreams he sometimes even proposed tohimself the question whether he should not havea marten-fur collar made for his coat. These and similar thoughts sometimes causedhim to be absent-minded. As he was copyinghis documents one day he suddenly noticed thathe had made a slip. "Ugh!
"
he exclaimed,and crossed himself.
At least once a month he went to Petrovitch todiscuss the precious cloak with him, and to settlemany important questions, e.g. where and atwhat price he should buy the cloth, and whatcolour he should choose.
Each of these visits gave rise to new discussions, but he always returned home in a happiermood, feeling that at last the day must comewhen all the materials would have been boughtand the cloak would be lying ready to put on. This great event happened sooner than he hadhoped. The director gave him a bonus, not offorty or fifty, but of five-and-sixty roubles. Hadthe worthy official noticed that Akaki neededa
new mantle, or was the exceptional amount of
the gift only due to chance?
However that might be, Akaki was now richer
by twenty roubles. Such an access of wealth
necessarily hastened his important undertaking.
After two or three more months of enduring
hunger, he had collected his eighty roubles.
His heart, generally so quiet, began to beat
violently ; he hastened to Petrovitch, who accompanied him to a draper's shop. There, without
hesitating, they bought a very fine piece of cloth.
For more than half a year they had discussed the
matter incessantly, and gone round the shops
inquiring prices. Petrovitch examined the cloth,
and said they would not find anything better.
For the lining they chose a piece of such firm and
thickly woven linen that the tailor declared it was
better than silk; it also had a splendid gloss on
it. They did not buy marten fur, for it was too
dear, but chose the best catskin in the shop,
which was a very good imitation of the former.
It took Petrovitch quite fourteen days to make
the mantle, for he put an extra number of
stitches into it. He charged twelve roubles for
his work, and said he could not ask less; it was
all sewn with silk, and the tailor smoothed the
sutures with his teeth.
At last the day came—I cannot name it certainly, but it assuredly was the most solemn
in Akaki's life—when the tailor brought the
cloak. He brought it early in the morning,before the titular councillor started for his office.He could not have come at a more suitablemoment, for the cold had again begun to bevery severe. Petrovitch entered the room with the dignified mien of an important tailor. His face worea peculiarly serious expression, such as Akakihad never seen on it. He was fully consciousof his dignity, and of the gulf which separatesthe tailor who only repairs old clothes fromtheartist who makes new ones. The cloak had been brought wrapped up inalarge, new, freshly washed handkerchief, whichthe tailor carefully opened, folded, and placedin his pocket. Then he proudly took the cloakin both hands and laid it on Akaki Akakievitch'sshoulders. He pulled it straight behind to seehow it hung majestically in its whole length.Finally he wished to see the effect it made whenunbuttoned. Akaki, however, wished to trythe sleeves, which fitted wonderfully well. Inbrief, the cloak was irreproachable, and its fitand cut left nothing to be desired.
While the tailor was contemplating his work,he did not forget to say that the only reasonhehad charged so little for making it, was that hehad only a low rent to pay and had known AkakiAkakievitch for a long time; he declared thatany tailor who lived on the Nevski Prospect
would have charged at least five-and-sixty
roubles for making up such a cloak.
The titular councillor did not let himself be
involved in a discussion on the subject. Hethanked him, paid him, and then sallied forth on
his way to the office. Petrovitch went out with him, and remained
standing in the street to watch Akaki as long as possible wearing the mantle; then he hurried
through a cross-alley and came into the main
street again to catch another glimpse of him.
Akaki went on his way in high spirits. Every
moment he was acutely conscious of having
a new cloak on, and smiled with sheer self- complacency. His head was filled with only
two ideas : first that the cloak was warm, and
secondly that it was beautiful. Without noticing anything on the road, he marched straight to the chancellery, took off his treasure in the hall,
and solemnly entrusted it to the porter's care.
I do not know how the report spread in the
office that Akaki' s old cloak had ceased to exist.
All his colleagues hastened to see his splendid
new one, and then began to congratulate him
so warmly that he at first had to smile with
self-satisfaction, but finally began to feel embarrassed.
But how great was his surprise when his cruel
colleagues remarked that he should formally
11 handsel" his cloak by giving them a feast!
Poor Akaki was so disconcerted and taken aback,that he did not know what to answer nor howtoexcuse himself. He stammered out, blushing,that the cloak was not so new as it appeared ; itwas really second-hand.
One of his superiors, who probably wishedtoshow that he was not too proud of his rank andtitle, and did not disdain social intercourse withhis subordinates, broke in and said, "Gentlemen ! Instead of Akaki Akakievitch, I will invite you to a little meal. Come to tea withme this evening. To-day happens to be mybirthday/'
All the others thanked him for his kindproposal, and joyfully accepted his invitation.Akaki at first wished to decline, but was toldthat to do so would be grossly impolite andunpardonable, so he reconciled himself to theinevitable. Moreover, he felt a certain satisfaction at the thought that the occasion would givehim a new opportunity of displaying his cloak inthe streets. This whole day for him was like afestival-day. In the cheerfullest possible moodhe returned home, took off his cloak, and hungit up on the wall after once more examining thecloth and the lining. Then he took out his oldone in order to compare it with Petrovitch'smasterpiece. His looks passed from one tothe other, and he thought to himself, smiling,"What a difference!"
He ate his Supper cheerfully, and after he
had finished, did not sit down as usual to copy
documents. No; he lay down, like a Sybarite, on the sofa and waited. When the time came,
he made his toilette, took his cloak, and went
out.
I cannot say where was the house of the
superior official who so graciously invited his
subordinates to tea. My memory begins to grow
weak, and the innumerable streets and houses
of St Petersburg go round so confusedly in my
head that I have difficulty in finding my way
about them. So much, however, is certain:
that the honourable official lived in a very fine
quarter of the city, and therefore very far from
Akaki Akakievitch's dwelling.
At first the titular councillor traversed several
badly lit streets which seemed quite empty; but
the nearer he approached his superior's house,
the more brilliant and lively the streets became.
He met many people, among whom were
elegantly dressed ladies, and men with beaverskin collars. The peasants' sledges, with their
wooden seats and brass studs, became rarer; while now every moment appeared skilled coachmen with velvet caps, driving lacquered sleighs
covered with bearskins, and fine carriages.
At last he reached the house whither he had
been invited. His host lived in a first-rate style ; a lamp hung before his door, and he occupied
the whole of the second story. As Akakientered the vestibule, he saw a long row ofgaloshes ; on a table a samovar was smoking andhissing; many cloaks, some of them adornedwith velvet and fur collars, hung on the wall.In the adjoining room he heard a confused noise,which assumed a more decided character whena servant opened the door and came out bearinga tray full of empty cups, a milk-jug, andabasket of biscuits. Evidently the guests hadbeen there some time and had already drunktheir first cup of tea. After hanging his cloak on a peg, Akakiapproached the room in which his colleagues,smoking long pipes, were sitting round the cardtable and making a good deal of noise. Heentered the room, but remained standing by thedoor, not knowing what to do ; but his colleaguesgreeted him with loud applause, and all hastenedinto the vestibule to take another look at hiscloak. This excitement quite robbed the goodtitular councillor of his composure; but in hissimplicity of heart he rejoiced at the praiseswhich were lavished on his precious cloak.Soon afterwards his colleagues left him to himself and resumed their whist parties.
Akaki felt much embarrassed, and did notknow what to do with his feet and hands.Finally he sat down by the players ; looked nowat their faces and now at the cards; then he
yawned and remembered that it was long past
his usual bedtime. He made an attempt to go,
but they held him back and told him that he
could not do so without drinking a glass of
champagne on what was for him such a memorable day.
Soon supper was brought. It consisted of
cold veal, cakes, and pastry of various kinds,
accompanied by several bottles of champagne.
Akaki was obliged to drink two glasses of it, and
found everything round him take on a more
cheerful aspect. But he could not forget that it was already midnight and that he ought to have
been in bed long ago. From fear of being kept
back again, he slipped furtively into the vestibule, where he was pained to find his cloak lying on the ground. He carefully shook it, brushed
it, put it on, and went out. The street-lamps were still alight. Some of
the small ale-houses frequented by servants and
the lower classes were still open, and some had
just been shut; but by the beams of light which
shone through the chinks of the doors, it was
easy to see that there were still people inside,
probably male and female domestics, who were
quite indifferent to their employers' interests.
Akaki Akakievitch turned homewards in a cheerful mood. Suddenly he found himself in a long street where it was very quiet by day and
still more so at night. The surroundings were
very dismal. Only here and there hung a lampwhich threatened to go out for want of oil ; therewere long rows of wooden houses with woodenfences, but no sign of a living soul. Only thesnow in the street glimmered faintly in the dimlight of the half-extinguished lanterns, and thelittle houses looked melancholy in the darkness.Akaki went on till the street opened into anenormous square, on the other side of whichthehouses were scarcely visible, and which lookedlike a terrible desert. At a great distance—Godknows where ! —glimmered the light in a sentrybox, which seemed to stand at the end of theworld. At the same moment Akaki' s cheerfulmood vanished. He went in the direction of thelight with a vague sense of depression, as thoughsome mischief threatened him. On the wayhekept looking round him with alarm. The huge,melancholy expanse looked to him like a sea.11 No," he thought to himself, "
I had better notlook at it
' ' ; and he continued his way withhiseyes fixed on the ground. When he raised themagain he suddenly saw just in front of him severalmen with long moustaches, whose faces he couldnot distinguish. Everything grew dark beforehis eyes, and his heart seemed to be constricted.* ' That is my cloak ! ' * shouted one of the men,and seized him by the collar. Akaki triedtocall for help. Another man pressed a greatbony fist on his mouth, and said to him,
' ' Just
try to scream again! " At the same moment
the unhappy titular councillor felt the cloak
snatched away from him, and simultaneously
received a kick which stretched him senseless
in the snow. A few minutes later he came to himself and stood up; but there was no longer
anyone in sight. Bobbed of his cloak, and feel- ing frozen to the marrow, he began to shout with
all his might; but his voice did not reach the end
of the huge square. Continuing to shout, he
ran with the rage of despair to the sentinel in the
sentry-box, who, leaning on his halberd, asked
him why the deuce he was making such a hellish
noise and running so violently.
When Akaki reached the sentinel, he accused
him of being drunk because he did not see that
passers-by were robbed a short distance from his
sentry-box.
"I saw you quite well/' answered the sentinel,
* ' in the middle of the square with two
men; I thought you were friends. It is no good
getting so excited. Go to-morrow to the police
inspector; he will take up the matter, have the
thieves searched for, and make an examination."
Akaki saw there was nothing to be done but
to go home. He reached his dwelling in a state of dreadful disorder, his hair hanging wildly over his forehead, and his clothes covered
with snc-w. When his old landlady heard him knocking violently at the door, she sprangupaiid hastened thither, only half-dressed; butatthe sight of Akaki started back in alarm. Whenhe told her what had happened, she clasped herhands together and said, " You should not gotothe police inspector, but to the municipal Superintendent of the district. The inspector will putyou off with fine words, and do nothing; butIhave known the Superintendent for a long time.My former cook, Anna, is now in his service,and I often see him pass by under our windows.He goes to church on all the festival-days, andone sees at once by his looks that he is an honestman."
After hearing this eloquent recommendation,Akaki retired sadly to his room. Those whocanpicture to themselves such a situation will understand what sort of a night he passed. As earlyas possible the next morning he went to theSuperintendent's house. The servants told himthat he was still asleep. At ten o'clock hereturned, only to receive the same reply. Attwelve o'clock the Superintendent had gone out.About dinner-time the titular councillor calledagain, but the clerks asked him in a severe tonewhat was his business with their superior. Thenfor the first time in his life Akaki displayedanenergetic character. He declared that it wasabsolutely necessary for him to speak withtheSuperintendent on an official matter, and that
anyone who ventured to put difficulties in his
way would have to pay dearly for it. This left them without reply. One of the
clerks departed, in order to deliver his message.
When Akaki was admitted to the Superintendent's presence, the latter's way of receiving his
story was somewhat singular. Instead of confining himself to the principal matter—the theft,
he asked the titular councillor how he came to be out so late, and whether he had not been in
suspicious company.
Taken aback by such a question, Akaki did
not know what to answer, and went away without knowing whether any steps would be taken
in the matter or not. The whole day he had not been in his office—a perfectly new event in his life. The next day
he appeared there again with a pale face and
restless aspect, in his old cloak, which looked
more wretched than ever. When his colleagues
heard of his misfortune, some were cruel enough
to laugh; most of them, however, felt a sincere
sympathy with him, and started a subscription
for his benefit; but this praiseworthy undertaking had only a very insignificant result, because
these same officials had been lately called upon
to contribute to two other subscriptions—in the
first case to purchase a portrait of their director,
and in the second to buy a work which a friend
of his had published,
One of them, who felt sincerely sorry forAkaki, gave him some good advice for wantofsomething better. He told him it was a wasteof time to go again to the Superintendent,because even in case that this official succeededin recovering the cloak, the police would keepittill the titular councillor had indisputably provedthat he was the real owner of it. Akaki' s friendsuggested to him to go to a certain importantpersonage, who because of his connection withthe authorities could expedite the matter.
In his bewilderment, Akaki resolved to followthis advice. It was not known what positionthis personage occupied, nor how high it reallywas; the only facts known were that he hadonly recently been placed in it, and that theremust be still higher personages than himself,ashe was leaving no stone unturned in order to getpromotion. When he entered his private room,he made his subordinates wait for him onthestairs below, and no one had direct accesstohim. If anyone called with a request to see him,the secretary of the board informed the Government secretary, who in his turn passed it ontoa higher official, and the latter informed theimportant personage himself.
That is the way business is carried on in ourHoly Eussia. In the endeavour to resemblethehigher officials, everyone imitates the mannersof his superiors. Not long ago a titular councillor, who was appointed to the headship of a
little office, immediately placed over the door
of one of his two tiny rooms the inscription
11 Council-chamber." Outside it were placed
servants with red collars and lace-work on their
coats, in order to announce petitioners, and to conduct them into the chamber which was hardly
large enough to contain a chair.
But let us return to the important personage
in question. His way of carrying things on was
dignified and imposing, but a trifle complicated.
His system might be summed up in a single
word—i( severity.'
' This word he would repeat
in a sonorous tone three times in succession, and
the last time turn a piercing look on the person
with whom he happened to be speaking. Hemight have spared himself the trouble of displaying so much disciplinary energy; the ten
officials who were under his command feared
him quite sufficiently without it. As soon as they were aware of his approach, they would lay
down their pens, and hasten to station themselves in a respectful attitude as he passed by.
In converse with his subordinates, he preserved
a stiff, unbending attitude, and generally confined himself to such expressions as
' ' What do
you want? Do you know with whom you are speaking? Do you consider who is in front of
you?"
For the rest, he was a good-natured man,friendly and amiable with his acquaintances.But the title of "District-Superintendent" hadturned his head. Since the time when it hadbeen bestowed upon him, he lived for a greatpart of the day in a kind of dizzy self-intoxication. Among his equals, however, he recoveredhis equilibrium, and then showed his realamiability in more than one direction; butassoon as he found himself in the society of anyoneof less rank than himself, he entrenched himselfin a severe taciturnity. This situation wasallthe more painful for him as he was quite awarethat he might have passed his time more agreeably.
All who watched him at such moments perceived clearly that he longed to take part in aninteresting conversation, but that the fear ofdisplaying some unguarded courtesy, of appearing too confidential, and thereby doing a deadlyinjury to his dignity, held him back. In orderto avoid such a risk, he maintained an unnaturalreserve, and only spoke from time to timeinmonosyllables. He had driven this habit to sucha pitch that people called him "The Tedious,"and the title was well deserved.
Such was the person to whose aid Akakiwished to appeal. The moment at whichhecame seemed expressly calculated to flatter theSuperintendent's vanity, and accordingly to helpforward the titular councillor's cause.
The high personage was seated in his office^ talking cheerfully with an old friend whom he
had not seen for several years, when he was told
that a gentleman named Akakievitch begged for
the honour of an interview.
"Who is the man?" asked the Superintendent in a contemptuous tone.
"An official/' answered the servant.
1 ' He must wait. I have no time to receive
him now."
The high personage lied; there was nothing
in the way of his granting the desired audience.
His friend and himself had already quite ex- hausted various topics of conversation. Manylong, embarrassing pauses had occurred, during
which they had lightly tapped each other on the
shoulder, saying, " So it was, you see."
"Yes, Stepan."
But the Superintendent refused to receive the
petitioner, in order to show his friend, who had
quitted the public service and lived in the
country, his own importance, and how officials must wait in the vestibule till he chose to receive
them.
At last, after they had discussed various other
subjects with other intervals of silence, during
which the two friends leaned back in their chairs
and blew cigarette smoke in the air, the Superintendent seemed suddenly to remember that someone had sought an interview with him. He
called the secretary, who stood with a roll ofpapers in his hand at the door, and told himtoadmit the petitioner.
When he saw Akaki approaching with hishumble expression, wearing his shabby olduniform, he turned round suddenly towards himand said
' ' What do you want ?'** in a severevoice, accompanied by a vibrating intonationwhich at the time of receiving his promotion hehad practised before the looking-glass for eightdays.
The modest Akaki was quite taken aback byhis harsh manner; however, he made an effortto recover his composure, and to relate howhiscloak had been stolen, but did not do so withoutencumbering his narrative with a mass of superfluous detail. He added that he had applied toHis Excellence in the hope that through hismaking a representation to the police inspector,or some other high personage, the cloak mightbe traced. l The Superintendent found Akaki' s methodofprocedure somewhat unofficial. "Ah, sir," hesaid, "don't you know what steps you ought totake in such a case? Don't you know the properprocedure? You should have handed in yourpetition at the chancellery. This in due coursewould have passed through the hands of the chiefclerk and director of the bureau. It wouldthen have been brought before my secretary,
who would have made a communication to you." "
Allow me," replied Akaki, making a strenu- ous effort to preserve the remnants of his
presence of mind, for he felt that the perspiration stood on his forehead, "
allow me to remark
to Your Excellence that I ventured to trouble
you personally in this matter because secretaries —secretaries are a hopeless kind of people."
1 ' What ! How ! Is it possible ?
' ' exclaimed
the Superintendent. " How could you say such
a thing? Where have you got your ideas from?
It is disgraceful to see young people so rebellious
towards their superiors." In his official zeal
the Superintendent overlooked the fact that the
titular councillor was well on in the fifties, and
that the word ' * young
' ' could only apply to him
conditionally, i.e. in comparison with a man of
seventy. "Do you also know," he continued,
4 ' with whom you are speaking ? Do you consider before whom you are standing? Do you
consider, I ask you, do you consider ? " As he
spoke, he stamped his foot, and his voice grew
deeper.
Akaki was quite upset—nay, thoroughly
frightened; he trembled and shook and could
hardly remain standing upright. Unless one of
the office servants had hurried to help him, he
would have fallen to the ground. As it was, he was dragged out almost unconscious.But the Superintendent was quite delighted atthe effect he had produced. It exceeded all hisexpectations, and filled with satisfaction at thefact that his words made such an impression onamiddle-aged man that he lost consciousness, hecast a side-glance at his friend to see what effectthe scene had produced oil him. His self-satisfaction was further increased when he observed that his friend also was moved, and lookedat him half-timidly.
Akaki had no idea how he got down the stairsand crossed the street, for he felt more dead thanalive. In his whole life he had never been soscolded by a superior official, let alone one whomhe had never seen before.
He wandered in the storm which raged withouttaking the least care of himself, nor shelteringhimself on the side-walk against its fury. Thewind, which blew from all sides and out of all thenarrow streets, caused him to contract inflammation of the throat. When he reached homehewas unable to speak a word, and went straightto bed.
Such was the result of the Superintendent'slecture.
The next day Akaki had a violent fever.Thanks to the St Petersburg climate, his illnessdeveloped with terrible rapidity. Whenthedoctor came, he saw that the case was alreadyhopeless ; he felt his pulse and ordered him some
poultices, merely in order that he should not die
without some medical help, and declared at once
that he had only two days to live. After giving
this opinion, he said to Akaki's landlady, V There
is no time to be lost ; order a pine coffin, for an
oak one would be too expensive for this poor
man."
Whether trie titular councillor heard these
words, whether they excited him and made himlament his tragic lot, no one ever knew, for he was delirious all the time. Strange pictures
passed incessantly through his weakened brain.
At one time he saw Petrovitch the tailor andasked him to make a cloak with nooses attached
for the thieves who persecuted him in bed, andbegged his old landlady to chase away the
robbers who were hidden under his coverlet.
At another time he seemed to be listening to the
Superintendent's severe reprimand, and asking
his forgiveness. Then he uttered such strange
and confused remarks that the old womancrossed herself in alarm. She had never heard
anything of the kind in her life, and these ravings
astonished her all the more because the expression "Your Excellency "
constantly occurred
in them. Later on he murmured wild disconnected words, from which it could only begathered that his thoughts were continually
revolving round a cloak.
At last Akaki breathed his last. Neither his room nor his cupboard were officially sealed up,for the simple reason that he had no heir and left nothing behind him but a bundle of goose-quills,a notebook of white paper, three pairs of socks,some trouser buttons, and his old coat. Into whose possession did these relics pass?Heaven only knows ! The writer of this narrative has never inquired.
Akaki was wrapped in his shroud, and laidto rest in the churchyard. The great city ofSt Petersburg continued its life as though hehad never existed. Thus disappeared a humancreature who had never possessed a patron orfriend, who had never elicited real heartysympathy from anyone, nor even aroused thecuriosity of the naturalists, though they are mosteager to subject a rare insect to microscopicexamination.
Without a complaint he had borne the scornand contempt of his colleagues; he had proceeded on his quiet way to the grave withoutanything extraordinary happening to him—onlytowards the end of his life he had been joyfullyexcited by the possession of a new cloak, andhad then been overthrown by misfortune.
Some days after his conversation with theSuperintendent, his superior in the chancellery,where no one knew what had become of him,sent an official to his house to demand hispresence. The official returned with the news
that no one would see the titular councillor any
more. "Why?" asked all the clerks. "
Because he was buried four days ago."
In such a manner did Akaki's colleagues hear
of his death.
The next day his place was occupied by an
official of robuster fibre, a man who did not
trouble to make so many fair transcripts of state documents.
It seems as though Akaki's story ended here,
and that there was nothing more to be said
of him; but the modest titular councillor was
destined to attract more notice after his death
than during his life, and our tale now assumes a somewhat ghostly complexion.
One day there spread in St Petersburg the
report that near the Katinka Bridge there
appeared every night a spectre in a uniform like
that of the chancellery officials; that he was
searching for a stolen cloak, and stripped all passers-by of their cloaks without any regard
for rank or title. It mattered not whether they were lined with wadding, mink, cat, otter, bear, or beaverskin; he took all he could get hold of. One of the titular councillor's former colleagues
had seen the ghost, and quite clearly recognised
Akaki. He ran as hard as he could and managed to escape, but had seen him shaking his fist in the distance. Everywhere it was reportedthat councillors, and not only titular councillorsbut also state-councillors, had caught seriouscolds in their honourable backs on account ofthese raids.
The police adopted all possible measures inorder to get this ghost dead or alive into theirpower, and to inflict an exemplary punishmenton him ; but all their attempts were vain.
One evening, however, a sentinel succeededin getting hold of the malefactor just as hewas trying to rob a musician of his cloak. Thesentinel summoned with all the force of his lungstwo of his comrades, to whom he entrusted theprisoner while he sought for his snuff-box inorder to bring some life again into his half-frozennose. Probably his snuff was so strong thateven a ghost could not stand it. Scarcely hadthe sentinel thrust a grain or two up his nostrilsthan the prisoner began to sneeze so violentlythat a kind of mist rose before the eyes of thesentinels. While the three were rubbing theireyes, the prisoner disappeared. Since that day,all the sentries were so afraid of the ghost thatthey did not even venture to arrest the livingbut shouted to them from afar •' Go on! Goon!"
Meanwhile the ghost extended his depredations to the other side of the Katinka Bridge, and
spread dismay and alarm in the whole of the
quarter.
But now we must return to the Superintendent, who is the real origin of our fantastic yet
so veracious story. First of all we must do him
the justice to state that after Akaki's departure
he felt a certain sympathy for him. He was by
no means without a sense of justice—no, he
possessed various good qualities, but his infatuation about his title hindered him from showing
his good side. When his friend left him, hia
thoughts began to occupy themselves with the
unfortunate titular councillor, and from that
moment onwards he saw him constantly in his
mind's eye, crushed by the severe reproof which
had been administered to him. This image so haunted him that at last one day he ordered one
of his officials to find out what had become of
Akaki, and whether anything could be done for
him.
When the messenger returned with the news
that the poor man had died soon after that
interview, the Superintendent felt a pang in his
conscience, and remained the whole day absorbed in melancholy brooding.
In order to banish his unpleasant sensations,
he went in the evening to a friend's house, where
he hoped to find pleasant society and what was
the chief thing, some other officials of his own
rank, so that he would not be obliged to feel bored. And in fact he did succeed in throwingoff his melancholy thoughts there; he unbentand became lively, took an active part in theconversation, and passed a very pleasant evening. At supper he drank two glasses of champagne, which, as everyone knows, is an effectivemeans of heightening one's cheerfulness.
As he sat in his sledge, wrapped in his mantle,on his way home, his mind was full of pleasantreveries. He thought of the society in whichhe had passed such a cheerful evening, and ofall the excellent jokes with which he had madethem laugh. He repeated some of them tohimself half-aloud, and laughed at them again.From time to time, however, he was disturbedin this cheerful mood by violent gusts of wind,which from some corner or other blew a quantityof snowflakes into his face, lifted the folds of hiscloak, and made it belly like a sail, so that hehad to exert all his strength to hold it firmly onhis shoulders. Suddenly he felt a powerful handseize him by the collar. He turned round, perceived a short man in an old, shabby uniform,and recognised with terror Akaki's face, whichwore a deathly pallor and emaciation.
The titular councillor opened his mouth, fromwhich issued a kind of corpse-like odour, andwith inexpressible fright the Superintendentheard him say, "At last I have you—by thegoljar! I need your cloak. You did not
trouble about me when I was in distress; you
thought it necessary to reprimand me. Nowgive me your cloak.'
' The high dignitary nearly choked. In his
office, and especially in the presence of his
subordinates, he was a man of imposing manners. He only needed to fix his eye on one
of them and they all seemed impressed by his
pompous bearing. But, as is the case with
many such officials, all this was only outward
show; at this moment he felt so upset that he
seriously feared for his health. Taking off his
cloak with a feverish, trembling hand, he handedit to Akaki, and called to his coachman,
M
Drive
home quickly.
5 ' When the coachman heard this voice, whichdid not sound as it usually did, and had often
been accompanied by blows of a whip, he bent
his head cautiously and drove on apace.
Soon afterwards the Superintendent found
himself at home. Cloakless, he retired to his
room with a pale face and wild looks, and hadsuch a bad night that on the following morninghis daughter exclaimed "
Father, are you ill? MBut he said nothing of what he had seen, though
a very deep impression had been made on him.
From that day onwards he no longer addressed
to his subordinates in a violent tone the words,
"Do you know with whom you are speaking?
Do you know who is standing before you?
" Or if it ever did happen that he spoke to them in adomineering tone, it was not till he had first listened to what they had to say.
Strangely enough, from that time the spectrenever appeared again. Probably it was theSuperintendent's cloak which he had been seeking so earnestly; now he had it and did notwant anything more. Various persons, however,asserted that this formidable ghost was still to beseen in other parts of the city. A sentinel wentso far as to say that he had seen him with his owneyes glide like a furtive shadow behind a house.But this sentinel was of such a nervous disposition that he had been chaffed about his timiditymore than once. Since he did not venture toseize the flitting shadow, he stole after it in thedarkness; but the shadow turned round andshouted at him " What do you want? "
shakingan enormous fist, such as no man had everpossessed.
' I want nothing,
' ' answered the sentry,quickly retiring.
This shadow, however, was taller than theghost of the titular councillor, and had an enor-mous moustache. He went with great stridestowards the Obuchoff Bridge, and disappeared inthe darkness.


